# spark-data-lake

## Introduction
This project builds a new Spark/EMR cluster in AWS. Under `/terraform` directory the infrastructure as code is defined. In `etl.py` the actual ETL processes are performed. 

## Data & Files 

### DATA
The data that will be loaded from S3 resides here:
- Song data: `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`
- Log data: `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`
- Log data json path: `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`

The output tables/parquet files are loaded in this S3 bucket:
- Output log data: `s3://emr-output-data`

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

Typical example of the data:
```{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}```

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

### Python Files
- etl.py: this python file performs the ETL. Firstly the data is read from S3, then ETL is performed on the data and pushed into parquet files in the output S3 bucket. 
- terraform/*: IaC terraform files in this directory create the IAM role and the actual Spark EMR cluster.

## Schema for Spark Tables
In this section the schema's for the database are explained. 

### Fact Table
1. songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong`
   - `songplay_id`, `start_time`, `user_id`, `level`, `song_id`, `artist_id`, `session_id`, `location`, `user_agent`

### Dimension Tables
2. users - users in the app
   - `user_id`, `first_name`, `last_name`, `gender`, `level`
3. songs - songs in music database
   - `song_id`, `title`, `artist_id`, `year`, `duration`
4. artists - artists in music database
   - `artist_id`, `name`, `location`, `latitude`, `longitude`
5. time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
   - `start_time`, `hour`, `day`, `week`, `month`, `year`, `weekday`
